# Zooplankton-microbiome
Datafiles and scripts related to "Freshwater zooplankton microbiota composition is highly flexible and strongly influenced by the environment"
 The sequencing data can be found at: Sequences from cultures/experiments are deposited at NCBI SRA with accession number PRJNA655592 and sequences from the environmental samples with accession number PRJNA655595, accession numbers to other datasets used can be found in Supplementary table 2. 


Here the material and methods related to the submitted files.
Material and Methods

Zooplankton and water samples
Environmental samples with zooplankton were taken using a 30μm mesh size plankton net. The surrounding water was sampled manually from the same sites using 1L glass bottles before collecting the zooplankton. Samples were collected from different freshwater lentic habitats, including lakes, ponds, and puddles (Table S1). Water and animals were kept in a cooling box in the dark for a few hours before animals were manually isolated at a stereo microscope and identified morphologically using a compound microscope. Pools of 10-200 animals depending on animal size and abundance were washed three times with distilled water and used for microbiome sequencing in the MicroBead tubes of the UltraClean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Lab, QIAGEN, Germany). Additionally, 4-5 single animals of each species were isolated, washed and placed singularly into tubes to amplify target genetic markers to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships between them. Water samples were prefiltered through a 30μm mesh net to remove animals and 200-1000ml were filtered on a 0.2μm pore-sized polycarbonate membranes with 47 mm diameter (Millipore). All samples were kept at -20°C before DNA extraction. The selection of zooplankton species included Rotifera Bdelloidea, Rotifera Monogononta, Crustacea Cladocera, and Crustacea Copepoda (Figure 1, Table S1). Up to three replicates were used for sequencing the microbiome of each sample (Figure 1).
Additional species and surrounding waters were included from laboratory cultures of Lecane inermis (from long term culture provided by Edyta Fiałkowska, Jagellonian University, Poland,33), Adineta vaga (from long term culture provided by Christopher Wilson, Oxford University, UK) and Rotaria macrura (isolated from the field to establish lab cultures, Table S1, sample 15). Cultures were kept in 50ml cell culture flasks using 126μm pre-filtered and autoclaved lake water (ALW, 34) from Lake Maggiore (Verbania, Italy) in the same thermostat at 18°C with a 16:8 hours light:dark daily cycle. Different kinds of food were used alone or in combination to keep the animals alive: the alga Kirchneriella sp., homogenised lettuce juice, or diluted honey.

DNA sequencing
The total DNA from each samples (water and animals) was extracted using UltraClean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Lab, QIAGEN, Germany) following the manufacturer’s protocol, with minor changes described elsewhere for animal samples 13 and water samples 35. Quantification of the total DNA was done with the QuBit Fluorometer (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). DNA quality was first evaluated by amplification of the 16S rRNA using primers the 27F (5’-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3’) and 1492R (5’-TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’) primers and amplification was verified using gel electrophoresis. If amplification was successful genomic DNA was sent out for high throughput sequencing.
Amplicon libraries were prepared and sequencing was conducted by IGA Technology (Udine, Italy) using Illumina Nextera chemistry and a Miseq platform. Universal bacterial primers S-D-Bact-0341-b-S-17, 50-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-30, and S-D-Bact-0785-a-A-21, 50-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-30  36 with an amplicon size of 464bp were used. Additional previously published data were downloaded as raw Miseq reads: one dataset included triplicate samples of Daphnia obtusa 13, one included Daphnia galeata, Eudiaptomus padanus and the surrounding water samples 20.  
All raw reads generated in this and in previous studies were cleaned and clustered in the same pipeline. Adaptors and primers were clipped from the sequences using cutadapt 1.9.1 37. The Usearch/Uparse pipeline was used for sequence assembly, quality filtration, chimera check and removal, and preparation of the database of bacteria composition 38,39, mainly as suggested in the online tutorial with the following specifications: while merging, the max-diff parameter was set to 8, and then, sequences were filtered to a min and max-length of 344 and 366, respectively, with a max error of 0.5  The unnois3 command of UParse pipeline was used for the construction of zero radius operational taxonomic units (zOTUs 40 ). For the taxonomic assignments of zOTUs, the utax command was used with the Silva database version 123 41 requiring a minimum similarity of 60% for the taxonomic assignment. zOTUs assigned to non-bacterial taxa (i.e. chloroplast and mitochondria) were removed from the dataset. 
DNA for the phylogenetic analyses of the zooplankton hosts was isolated from single individuals, a fragment of the mitochondrial COI and a fragment of the nuclear 18S rDNA were amplified and sequenced by PCR following the protocols of Tang et al. 42. For the phylogeny, the COI and 18S sequences were aligned independently using MAFFT 43. A concatenated alignment of 18S and COI was then used to reconstruct a time-calibrated phylogeny with BEAST version 2.6.0 44 using the CIPRES portal 45. The parameters for the reconstruction comprised a GTR + G + I substitution model, a relaxed lognormal clock, a birth–death prior, a random starting tree, 50,000,000 generations, and sampling every 5,000 generations. The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sample was checked for convergence in Tracer, and the trees were combined into a maximum credibility tree while keeping the target node heights with a 20% burn-in in TreeAnnotator.

Microbiome diversity
All data analyses were conducted in R version 3.5.1 (R Core Team 2018), using package ggplot2 46 for graphical outputs, and package reshape2 47 for data preparation. All graphs were further assembled and processed in Adobe Illustrator. For all statistical analyses, check of model assumptions and model fit were evaluated using package performance 48. 
Two metrics of diversity for the microbiome were used, namely richness and phylogenetic diversity of zOTUs. For richness, samples were rarefied to 2000 reads, excluding the 31 samples that were below such threshold (n= 124). For phylogenetic diversity, the mean pairwise distances (mpd) of each microbiome was calculated using a Maximum Likelihood tree of the representative sequences of all zOTUs on the Phyloseq online platform 49 and the R package ape 50.
The effect on both metrics of diversity was analysed depending on whether the samples came from cultures or environmental samples, and on whether they were crustaceans, rotifers or water samples. A generalised linear model (glm) was used with a poisson distribution for richness and a quasipoisson distribution for phylogenetic diversity, due to overdispersion. The output of these models are presented as analysis of deviance tables from the R package car 51. Post-hoc multiple comparisons from these models were performed with the R multcomp package 52.
In order to understand the effect of phylogenetic relatedness of the zooplankton host species on the zOTU composition of their microbiome, we selected one representative microbiome for each zooplankton species by calculating differences in microbial community composition between replicates from the same host species, even under different conditions, as abundance-based Bray-Curtis distances using the R package vegan 53, and by selecting the replicate with the shortest distance to the centroid of the samples of the same species using the R package usedist 54. Then we assessed the correlation between the matrix of Bray Curtis distances in microbiome composition for each zooplankton species and the matrix of patristic distances of the same zooplankton species from the phylogenetic tree of the hosts using a Mantel test.
To evaluate how differences between the 22 zooplankton replicated host species (n= 103, see replicate numbers per sample in Figure 1) and differences between sampling location influenced the Bray-Curtis distances between microbiomes, all animal samples were used in a permutational analysis of variance, PERMANOVA, in the R package vegan, with replicates in the strata argument. We then proceeded to a post-hoc analysis of the PERMANOVA where we evaluated whether the microbiota composition of crustaceans and rotifers was significantly different from each other using the R package RVAideMemoire 55.
We tested the effect of the surrounding water on the microbiome by assessing how much variance of Bray-Curtis distances was explained by the coupling of animals and water (only one replicate each, selected as described above) using PERMANOVA analysis. These analyses were performed only for samples with both animal and water samples taken concomitantly (18 species, see Fig. 1) and separately for crustaceans and rotifers. 

2.4 Core zOTUs
A further step to identify a potential functional role of the microbiome was performed by obtaining the so-called core zOTUs. defined as the zOTUs that are found in the majority of samples for each zooplankton species 28. The core was calculated within replicates for animal samples with 3 or more replicates from the same place or culture condition. Moreover, the core was calculated for all the species for which we had samples from more than one culture condition or from environment and culture (see Fig. 1). 
In order to compare the core zOTUs not only based on the specific presence of zOTUs but also on their phylogenetic relatedness, UniFrac distances were calculated to compare the cores of the different groups using a presences absence matrix and the zOTU-tree as described for phylogenetic diversity using the GUniFrac package 56. The relative abundance of the core zOTUs within all the reads of each samples were calculated. For means of comparison data from Hammer et al. 28 were depicted in Figure 4C, therein, to compare the relative abundance of core zOTUs of zooplankton and those of caterpillars and other animals.
For taxonomic assignments, core zOTUs were grouped on a family level and the contribution of each bacterial family to the core was depicted in order to identify families that commonly contribute zOTUs to the core of zooplankton. 

Manipulative experiments 
After analysing in detail the patterns of diversity of the microbiome composition in freshwater zooplankton species, we performed manipulative experiments to understand the potential mechanisms driving the adaptation, flexibility, or the stability of the rotifer microbiome on lab cultures of Lecane inermis. The manipulated variables were temperature (two levels: 18°C and 24°C) and food type (two levels: Kirchneriella and honey), together with the effect of potential random changes through time. 
In order to assess the possibility of temporal stability of the microbiome, two independent cultures of Lecane inermis were kept under the same conditions but with two different types of food (Kirchneriella and honey). For both types of food we compared the microbiome of animals at the beginning of the experiment (T1) and after 108 days (T3) at constant conditions. Moreover, for the cultures in algae we could also assess an intermediate step after 40 days (T2).
A second experiment was run to test the effect of environmental changes: after two cultures had been kept under constant culturing condition for several months at 18°C, one with Kirchneriella and one with honey as food, samples for microbiome of animals and of surrounding water were taken at the beginning of the experiment (T1); after an additional 75 days of constant culturing, each culture was then split into six new culture flasks and new medium was added. The resulting twelve cultures, half originating from constant Kirchneriella and the other half from constant honey supply, were divided into three treatments: four had the same temperature (18°C) and food (either Kirchneriella or honey) as the cultures from which they were obtained, four had the same food (either Kirchneriella or honey) but the temperature was changed to 24°C, and the last four had the same temperature (18°C) but the food was changed (either from Kirchneriella to honey or from honey to Kirchneriella). After one month under the new conditions, at (T3), three samples were prepared from each of the twelve cultures: one sample for the surrounding water and two samples for the animals. This difference in number is due to the fact that filtered water is presumed to be more homogeneous then the animal microbiome. 
Because Lecane inermis has a small size, with body length shorter than 200μm, the procedure to extract animals was optimised to obtain as manyanimals as possible without surrounding water: the culture was gently mixed in order to have a homogenized mixture of medium and rotifers, 2 ml were extracted, centrifuged at a low speed of 3000 rcf for 15 minutes at 24°C, discarding the supernatant, repeating the steps three times. After discarding the supernatant, 1 ml of sterile deionised water was added, the new mix was centrifuged for 15 minutes at the same speed and temperature as before. Following the centrifugation, only 1ml of total supernatant was discarded and what remained (supernatant and pellet) was transferred in an embryo dish. To optimize the washing out of unwanted microbial organisms, an additional 1ml of sterile deionised water was added. As a final step, trying to avoid all the water, only the animals were isolated and placed into the MicroBead tubes of the UltraClean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) at the stereomicroscope. At the end each tube was stored at –20°C until DNA extraction. A 50 μm filter was used to pre-filter the water from cultures, in order to avoid the smaller pieces of organic matter coming from the nourishment. Afterwards, at least 20 ml were filtered on a 0.2 μm pore-sized polycarbonate membranes with 25 mm diameter (Millipore). As was done with the animals, each filter was cut into small pieces and transferred into MicroBead tubes of the UltraClean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (QIAGEN, Germany). Filters were stored at -20°C until DNA extraction.
The same statistical analyses on microbiome diversity and zOTU composition described for the whole zooplankton were performed, in order to identify the role of time, food, temperature, and changing conditions on the microbiome.
In addition, we compared the results of Lecane inermis with those already published from Daphnia magna. The dataset from Callens et al 14 was used to test temporal stability of the microbiota, downloading and analysing only the sequences from the antibiotic-free controls that were checked multiple times over time in their experiments. The dataset from 57 was used including the microbiomes from clonal cultures. For the effect of changes in temperature, data from 17 was received from the authors. Data from all the different D. magna studies were used to assess the differences between environments, considering that they were held under different culture conditions for many years. 
